SOURCE: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH)
URL: https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/saw-palmetto
RETRIEVED: 2026-04-01
TYPE: Government complementary health fact sheet
========================================
Saw Palmetto: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health

Información en Español

National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

Saw Palmetto

© Thinkstock

Common Names:  saw palmetto, American dwarf palm tree, cabbage palm

Latin Names:  Serenoa repens , synonyms Serenoa serrulata, Sabal serrulata

Background

Saw palmetto is a small tree that grows to a height of 6 to 10 feet. It is native to the West Indies and the southeast coast of North America. Its berries have been used for health purposes.
Saw palmetto is promoted as a dietary supplement for urinary symptoms associated with an enlarged prostate gland (also called benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH), as well as for male pattern baldness, chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome (a frequently painful condition involving inflammation of the prostate), and other conditions.

How Much Do We Know?

Many studies have been conducted on the usefulness of saw palmetto for urinary tract symptoms associated with prostate enlargement in men. We know enough to conclude that saw palmetto is probably not helpful for this purpose.
There is not enough evidence to determine whether saw palmetto is useful for other health purposes. More studies are needed before definitive conclusions can be made.

What Have We Learned?

A 2023 review of 27 studies on saw palmetto in men with BPH found that this herb, when administered alone, provides little or no benefit for BPH symptoms. Definite conclusions could not be reached about the effects of combinations of herbs that include saw palmetto. Two clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health, both of which evaluated saw palmetto alone, were included in this review. One tested a standard dose of saw palmetto; the other tested increasing doses of saw palmetto, up to three times the usual dose. In both studies, saw palmetto did not improve BPH symptoms.
Because it had been suggested that saw palmetto products prepared using hexane extraction might be more effective than those prepared in other ways, the reviewers analyzed studies of these products and studies of other products separately. No difference was found in the effects of the two kinds of products on BPH symptoms.

A 2022 review of five studies on saw palmetto for chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome did not find a significant benefit of the herb in patients with this condition. 
A few small studies have tested saw palmetto, used orally or topically (applied to the scalp), for male-pattern hair loss. The evidence is too limited to allow conclusions to be reached.

What Do We Know About Safety?

Saw palmetto is well tolerated. It has been used safely in research studies for up to 3 years. Adverse effects are mild and infrequent; they may include digestive symptoms, dizziness, and headache.
Saw palmetto does not appear to affect readings of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels, even when taken in higher-than-usual amounts. PSA is a protein produced by the prostate gland. PSA levels have been used to screen for prostate cancer and are also used to monitor patients who have been diagnosed with prostate cancer
Saw palmetto may be unsafe for use during pregnancy or while breastfeeding.

Keep in Mind

Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions.
If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using any herbal product; some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways.
Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The regulatory paths for making and distributing dietary supplements are different than those for drugs.
Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements. 

For More Information

Using Dietary Supplements Wisely
Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact
Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article

NCCIH Clearinghouse
The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners.

Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226
Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1
Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov
Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email)

PubMed®
A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed .
Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH)
ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements).

Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov
Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email)

Key References

Andriole GL, McCullum-Hill C, Sandhu GS, et al.  The effect of increasing doses of saw palmetto fruit extract on serum prostate specific antigen: analysis of the CAMUS randomized trial . Journal of Urology. 2013;189(2):486-492.
Barry MJ, Meleth S, Lee JY, et al.  Effect of increasing doses of saw palmetto extract on lower urinary tract symptoms: a randomized trial . JAMA . 2011;306(12):1344-1351.
Bent S, Kane C, Shinohara K, et al.  Saw palmetto for benign prostatic hyperplasia . New England Journal of Medicine.  2006;354(6):557-566.
Franco JV, Trivisonno L, Sgarbossa NJ, et al.  Serenoa repens for the treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms due to benign prostatic enlargement . Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2023;6(6):CD001423. Accessed at  cochranelibrary.com on October 2, 2024.
Grammatikopoulou MG, Gkiouras K, Papageorgiou ST, et al.  Dietary factors and supplements influencing prostate-specific antigen (PSA) concentrations in men with prostate cancer and increased cancer risk: an evidence analysis review based on randomized controlled trials . Nutrients. 2020;12(10):2985.
Gupta AK, Talukder M, Williams G.  Emerging and traditional 5-α reductase inhibitors and androgen receptor antagonists for male androgenetic alopecia . Expert Opinion on Emerging Drugs . 2024;29(3):251-261.
Lok W, Lin T, Cao D, et al.  Is Serenoa repens effective for the treatment of chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CP/CPPS)? A systematic review and meta-analysis . Asian Journal of Surgery. 2022;45(9):1746-1747.
Saw palmetto. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticreearch.com on October 2, 2024. [Database subscription].
 

This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged.
NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH.

Last Updated:  April 2025

Share Email Facebook X

© Thinkstock

Related Topics
Herbs at a Glance
HerbList App