SOURCE: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH)
URL: https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/st-johns-wort
RETRIEVED: 2026-04-01
TYPE: Government complementary health fact sheet
========================================
St. John’s Wort: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health

Información en Español

National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

St. John’s Wort

© Steven Foster

Common Names:  St. John’s wort, hypericum, Klamath weed, goatweed

Latin Names:  Hypericum perforatum

Background

St. John’s wort is a plant with yellow flowers that has been widely used in various systems of traditional medicine, including Greek, Islamic, and Chinese medicine. The name St. John’s wort apparently refers to John the Baptist, as the plant blooms around the time of the feast of St. John the Baptist in late June.
Historically, St. John’s wort has been used for a variety of conditions, including depression, stomach ulcers, and colds, and to aid wound healing.
Currently, St. John’s wort is most widely promoted for symptoms of depression. It is also promoted for menopause symptoms and other conditions. Topical use (application to the skin) of St. John’s wort is promoted for wounds and other skin conditions.

How Much Do We Know?

Many studies have been done on the usefulness of St. John’s wort for depression, and their results indicate that it may be helpful for mild or moderate depression. For other conditions, the evidence is insufficient to allow definite conclusions about the usefulness of St. John’s wort to be reached.
It has been clearly shown that St. John’s wort can interact in dangerous, sometimes life-threatening ways with a variety of medicines.

What Have We Learned?

St. John’s wort appears to be more effective than a placebo (an inactive substance) and as effective as standard antidepressant medications for mild or moderate depression. It’s uncertain whether this is true for severe depression or for time periods longer than 12 weeks.
Small numbers of studies suggest that St. John’s wort may be helpful for hot flashes associated with menopause and for somatic symptom disorder (a condition involving intense anxiety about physical symptoms).
St. John’s wort has also been studied as a treatment for a variety of other conditions, including attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), irritable bowel syndrome, obsessive compulsive disorder, and premenstrual syndrome; as a possible aid to smoking cessation; and as an ingredient in topical preparations for wound healing. However, only a small amount of research has been done on the use of St. John’s wort for each of these purposes, and the evidence hasn’t clearly shown it to be helpful for any of them.

What Do We Know About Safety?

For most adults who are not taking any kind of medicine, St. John’s wort appears to be safe when used for up to 12 weeks, and some studies indicate that it can be used safely for a year or more.
If taken orally in large doses or applied to the skin, St. John’s wort might cause severe skin reactions after sun exposure. Other side effects can include diarrhea, dizziness, trouble sleeping, restlessness, and skin tingling.
If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using St. John’s wort or other herbal products; some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways.  For example, St. John’s wort can weaken the effects of many medicines, including crucially important medicines  such as: Some antidepressants, including amitriptyline and bupropion
Birth control pills
Cyclosporine, which prevents the body from rejecting transplanted organs
Some drugs used to prevent seizures, including phenytoin and carbamazepine
Some heart medications, including digoxin and ivabradine
Some HIV drugs, including indinavir and nevirapine
Some cancer medications, including irinotecan, imatinib, and docetaxel
Warfarin, an anticoagulant (blood thinner)
Certain statins, including simvastatin

In addition, taking St. John’s wort with certain antidepressants or other drugs that affect serotonin (a substance produced by some nerve cells) may lead to increased serotonin-related side effects, which can be serious.
It may be unsafe to use St. John’s wort during pregnancy because it may increase the risk of birth defects. Breastfeeding infants of mothers who take St. John’s wort can experience colic, drowsiness, and lethargy. 

Keep in Mind

Depression can be a serious illness. If you or someone in your family may have depression, consult a health care provider.
Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions. Although it is important to tell your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use, this is especially crucial for St. John’s wort because this herb interacts with so many medicines.  Interactions with St. John’s wort can weaken the effects of life-saving medicines or cause dangerous side effects.
Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The regulatory paths for dietary supplements are different than those for drugs.
Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements.

For More Information

Using Dietary Supplements Wisely
Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact
Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article

NCCIH Clearinghouse
The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners.

Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226
Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1
Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov
Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email)

PubMed®
A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed .
Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH)
ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements).

Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov
Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email)

Key References

Abrishami MH, Noras MR, Soltanifar A, et al.  Clinical evidence for the effectiveness of herbal medicines in the treatment of an obsessive-compulsive disorder: a review study . Current Drug Discovery Technologies. 2022;19(5):e160622206086. 
Apaydin EA, Maher AR, Shanman R, et al.  A systematic review of St. John’s wort for major depressive disorder . Systematic Reviews . 2016;5(1):148.
Chan W-JJ, Adiwidjaja J, McLachlan AJ, et al.  Interactions between natural products and cancer treatments: underlying mechanisms and clinical importance . Cancer Chemotherapy and Pharmacology. 2023; 91(2):103-119.
Czigle S, Nagy M, Mladěnka P, et al.  Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic herb-drug interactions—part I. Herbal medicines of the central nervous system . PeerJ. 2023;11:e16149.
Eatemadnia A, Ansari S, Abedi P, et al.  The effect of  Hypericum perforatum on postmenopausal symptoms and depression: a randomized controlled trial . Complementary Therapies in Medicine. 2019;45:109-113.
Farasati Far B, Gouranmohit G, Naimi-Jamal MR, et al.  The potential role of Hypericum perforatum  in wound healing: a literature review on the phytochemicals, pharmacological approaches, and mechanistic perspectives . Phytotherapy Research. 2024;38(7):3271-3295.
Liu Y-R, Jiang Y-L, Huang R-Q, et al.  Hypericum perforatum L. preparations for menopause: a meta-analysis of efficacy and safety . Climacteric. 2014;17(4):325-335.
Ng QX, Venkatanarayanan N, Ho CYX.  Clinical use of Hypericum perforatum (St John’s wort) in depression: a meta-analysis . Journal of Affective Disorders . 2017;210:211-221.
Nicolussi S, Drewe J, Butterweck V, et al.  Clinical relevance of St. John’s wort drug interactions revisited . British Journal of Pharmacology . 2020;177(6):1212-1226.
Nobakht SZ, Akaberi M, Mohammadpour AH, et al.  Hypericum perforatum : traditional uses, clinical trials, and drug interactions . Iranian Journal of Basic Medical Sciences. 2022;25(9):1045-1058.
Parsons A, Ingram J, Inglis J, et al.  A proof of concept randomised placebo controlled factorial trial to examine the efficacy of St John’s wort for smoking cessation and chromium to prevent weight gain on smoking cessation . Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 2009;102(1-3):116-122.
Soleymani S, Bahramsoltani R, Rahimi R, et al.  Clinical risks of St John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum)  co-administration . Expert Opinion on Drug Metabolism & Toxicology.  2017;13(10):1047-1062.
Sood A, Ebbert JO, Prasad K, et al.  A randomized clinical trial of St. John’s wort for smoking cessation . Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine. 2010;16(7):761-767.
St. John’s wort. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on November 15, 2024. [Database subscription].
Zhao X, Zhang H, Wu Y, et al.  The efficacy and safety of St. John’s wort extract in depression therapy compared to SSRIs in adults: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials . Advances in Clinical and Experimental Medicine. 2023;32(2):151-161.

This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged.
NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH.

Last Updated:  May 2025

Share Email Facebook X

© Steven Foster

Related Topics
Herbs at a Glance
HerbList App

For Health Care Providers
St. John&#x27;s Wort - Randomized Controlled Trials (PubMed®)
St. John&#x27;s Wort - Systematic Reviews/Reviews/Meta-analyses (PubMed®)
Depression and Complementary Health Approaches

Related Fact Sheets
St. John&#x27;s Wort and Depression: In Depth