SOURCE: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH)
URL: https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/turmeric
RETRIEVED: 2026-04-01
TYPE: Government complementary health fact sheet
========================================
Turmeric: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health

Información en Español

National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

Turmeric

© Steven Foster

Common Names:  turmeric, turmeric root, Indian saffron

Latin Names:  Curcuma longa , synonym Curcuma domestica; Curcuma aromatica

Background

Turmeric, a plant in the ginger family, is grown commercially in Southeast Asia and India. Its rhizome (underground stem) has been used for culinary and cosmetic purposes, among others.
Curcumin, a major component of turmeric, gives the spice its yellow color. The health activities of turmeric are commonly attributed to curcuminoids, which include curcumin.
Historically, turmeric has been used in Chinese, Indian (e.g., Ayurvedic), Islamic, and Thai traditional medicine systems for conditions such as indigestion, the common cold, skin infections, arthritis, abdominal pain, and liver disease. Turmeric has also been used in some Indian religious ceremonies.
Today, oral (taken by mouth) turmeric is promoted as a dietary supplement for a variety of conditions, including osteoarthritis, depression, allergies, itching, and high cholesterol. Topical (applied to the skin) turmeric is promoted for osteoarthritis.

How Much Do We Know?

Many studies have been conducted on the safety and usefulness of turmeric or curcumin for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), osteoarthritis, and high cholesterol or other lipid disorders. We don’t know enough to definitively conclude if turmeric or curcumin is beneficial for any health purposes.
Highly bioavailable formulations of curcumin, which enhance the body’s ability to absorb the curcumin, may harm your liver.

What Have We Learned?

It’s challenging to compare the available evidence on turmeric. Oral curcumin products vary in how much curcumin they actually contain, and they often contain substances from other plants, such as piperine from black pepper. Combining curcumin with piperine is one way to improve the bioavailability of curcumin. 
Several meta-analyses have evaluated oral turmeric or curcumin for osteoarthritis measures related to relieving knee pain and stiffness, increasing the strength of the joints, improving joint mobility, and other functions. The initial evidence is positive; higher-quality evidence is needed to reach definitive conclusions, and more research is needed to understand the impact of bioavailability on curcumin’s effects.
It’s unclear whether topical curcumin ointment has an effect on pain related to knee osteoarthritis. 
Initial research suggests that oral turmeric or curcumin might improve some NAFLD measures, but it’s unclear which specific measures are consistently improved. 
Initial research suggests that turmeric or curcumin in an oral or mouthwash formulation might improve symptoms of oral mucositis (tissue swelling and irritation in the mouth) related to cancer treatment. 
There isn’t enough evidence to definitively conclude whether oral turmeric or curcumin has beneficial effects on other health conditions.

What Do We Know About Safety?

Conventionally formulated oral turmeric or curcumin (not modified to enhance bioavailability) is likely safe in the recommended amounts for up to 2 or 3 months. 
Oral turmeric can cause adverse effects such as nausea and vomiting, acid reflux, stomach upset, diarrhea, or constipation. Topical curcumin can cause hives or itching. 
Many curcumin products with increased bioavailability are on the market, and liver damage has been reported in some people who have consumed these bioavailable formulations. If you notice any liver damage symptoms such as fatigue, nausea, poor appetite, dark urine, or jaundice, stop consuming turmeric or curcumin products immediately and talk with your health care provider. 
The use of turmeric supplements during pregnancy may be unsafe. Little is known about whether it’s safe to use turmeric in amounts greater than those commonly found in food while breastfeeding.

Keep in Mind

Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions.
If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using any herbal product; some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways.
Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The regulatory paths for dietary supplements are different than those for drugs.
Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements. 

For More Information

Using Dietary Supplements Wisely
Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact
Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article

NCCIH Clearinghouse
The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners.

Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226
Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1
Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov
Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email)

PubMed®
A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed .
Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH)
ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements).

Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov
Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email)

Key References

Akaberi M, Sahebkar A, Emami SA. Turmeric and curcumin: from traditional to modern medicine . Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology . 2021;1291:15-39.
Ebrahimzadeh A, Mohseni S, Safargar M, et al. Curcumin effects on glycaemic indices, lipid profile, blood pressure, inflammatory markers and anthropometric measurements of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials . Complementary Therapies in Medicine . 2024;80:103025.
Feng J, Li Z, Tian L, et al. Efficacy and safety of curcuminoids alone in alleviating pain and dysfunction for knee osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials . BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies . 2022;22(1):276.
Gutsche LC, Dörfler J, Hübner J. Curcumin as a complementary treatment in oncological therapy: a systematic review . European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology . 2025;81(1):1-33.
Halegoua-DeMarzio D, Navarro V, Ahmad J, et al. Liver injury associated with turmeric—a growing problem: ten cases from the Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network [DILIN] . The American Journal of Medicine . 2023;136(2):200-206.
Hidayat R, Parlindungan F, Nisa JI, et al. Efficacy of Curcuma longa in relieving pain symptoms of knee osteoarthritis patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials . Journal of Rheumatic Diseases . 2025;32(1):17-29.
Hsiao A-F, Lien Y-C, Tzeng I-S, et al. The efficacy of high- and low-dose curcumin in knee osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Complementary Therapies in Medicine . 2021;63:102775.
Jamali N, Adib-Hajbaghery M, Soleimani A. The effect of curcumin ointment on knee pain in older adults with osteoarthritis: a randomized placebo trial . BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies . 2020;20(1):305.
Kia SJ, Basirat M, Saedi HS, et al. Effects of nanomicelle curcumin capsules on prevention and treatment of oral mucositis in patients under chemotherapy with or without head and neck radiotherapy: a randomized clinical trial . BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies . 2021;21(1):232.
Likhitsup A, Chen VL, Fontana RJ. Estimated exposure to 6 potentially hepatotoxic botanicals in US adults . JAMA Network Open . 2024;7(8):e2425822.
Lukkunaprasit T, Tansawet A, Boonmanunt S, et al. An updated meta-analysis on effects of curcumin on metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease based on available evidence from Iran and Thailand . Scientific Reports . 2023;13(1):5824.
Malik A, Malik M. Effects of curcumin in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Canadian Liver Journal . 2024;7(2):299-315.
Molani-Gol R, Dehghani A, Rafraf M. Effects of curcumin/turmeric supplementation on the liver enzymes, lipid profiles, glycemic index, and anthropometric indices in non-alcoholic fatty liver patients: an umbrella meta-analysis . Phytotherapy Research . 2024;38(2):539-555.
Ngu MH, Norhayati MN, Rosnani Z, et al. Curcumin as adjuvant treatment in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver (NAFLD) disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Complementary Therapies in Medicine . 2022;68:102843.
Ramezani V, Ghadirian S, Shabani M, et al. Efficacy of curcumin for amelioration of radiotherapy-induced oral mucositis: a preliminary randomized controlled clinical trial . BMC Cancer. 2023;23(1):354.
Shah S, Rath H, Sharma G, et al. Effectiveness of curcumin mouthwash on radiation-induced oral mucositis among head and neck cancer patients: a triple-blind, pilot randomised controlled trial . Indian Journal of Dental Research . 2020;31(5):718-727.
Sorkin BC, Kuszak AJ, Bloss G, et al. Improving natural product research translation: from source to clinical trial . FASEB Journal. 2020;34(1):41-65.
Turmeric. LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury [Internet]. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive Kidney Diseases. Updated June 1, 2024. Accessed at ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK548561 on January 2, 2025.
Turmeric. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on November 13, 2024. [Database subscription].
Wu C-F, Wu H-J, Shih C-L, et al. Efficacy of turmeric in the treatment of oral mucositis in patients with head and neck cancer after radiotherapy: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Frontiers in Pharmacology . 2024;15:1363202.
Zeng L, Yang T, Yang K, et al. Efficacy and safety of curcumin and Curcuma longa extract in the treatment of arthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trial . Frontiers in Immunology . 2022;13:891822.

This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged.
NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH.

Last Updated:  April 2025

Share Email Facebook X

© Steven Foster

Related Topics
Herbs at a Glance
HerbList App

For Health Care Providers
Nutritional Approaches for Musculoskeletal Pain and Inflammation