SOURCE: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH)
URL: https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/valerian
RETRIEVED: 2026-04-01
TYPE: Government complementary health fact sheet
========================================
Valerian: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health

Información en Español

National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

Valerian

© Steven Foster

Common Names:  valerian, all-heal, garden heliotrope

Latin Names:  Valeriana officinalis

Background

Valerian is a plant native to Europe and Asia; it also grows in North America.
Valerian has been used medicinally since the times of early Greece and Rome. Historically, valerian was used to treat insomnia, migraine, fatigue, and stomach cramps.
Today, valerian is promoted for insomnia, anxiety, stress, and depression.
The roots and rhizomes (underground stems) of valerian are used for medicinal purposes.

How Much Do We Know?

Knowledge about valerian is limited because a relatively small amount of research has looked at valerian’s effects on various conditions.
There is not enough evidence to determine whether valerian is useful for any health conditions.

What Have We Learned?

The evidence on whether valerian is helpful for sleep problems is inconsistent. In its 2017 clinical practice guidelines, the American Academy of Sleep Medicine recommended against using valerian for chronic insomnia in adults.
Three small studies suggest that valerian might be helpful for menopause symptoms, but there is not enough evidence to know for certain.
There’s not enough evidence to allow any conclusions about whether valerian is helpful for anxiety, depression, premenstrual syndrome, dysmenorrhea (menstrual cramps), stress, or other conditions.

What Do We Know About Safety?

Research suggests that valerian is generally safe for short-term use by most adults. It has been used with apparent safety in doses of 300 to 600 milligrams daily for up to 6 weeks. The safety of long-term use of valerian is unknown.
Side effects of valerian include headache, stomach upset, mental dullness, excitability, uneasiness, and vivid dreams. Some may experience withdrawal symptoms, including anxiety, irritability, heart disturbances, insomnia, and in rare cases, hallucinations, if stopped abruptly after chronic use. In very rare cases, liver injury was reported when taking valerian, most often in combination with other herbals; however, valerian’s long-term effect on liver function is unknown.
Because it is possible (though not proven) that valerian might have a sleep-inducing effect, it should not be taken along with alcohol or sedatives. If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using valerian or other herbal products; some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways.
Little is known about whether it’s safe to use valerian during pregnancy or while breastfeeding.

Keep in Mind

Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions.
Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The regulatory paths for making and distributing dietary supplements are different than those for drugs.
Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements.  

For More Information

Using Dietary Supplements Wisely
Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact
Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article

NCCIH Clearinghouse
The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners.

Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226
Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1
Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov
Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email)

PubMed®
A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed .
Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH)
ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements).

Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov
Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email)

Key References

Abad VC, Guilleminault C. Insomnia in elderly patients: recommendations for pharmacological management . Drugs & Aging. 2018;35(9):791-817. 

Awang DVC. Valerian. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Informa Healthcare; 2010:766-777. 

Jenabi E, Shobeiri F, Hazavehei SMM, et al. The effect of valerian on the severity and frequency of hot flashes: a triple-blind randomized clinical trial . Women & Health. 2018;58(3):297-304. 

Leach MJ, Page AT. Herbal medicine for insomnia: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Sleep Medicine Reviews . 2015;24:1-12. 

Mirabi P, Mojab F. The effects of valerian root on hot flashes in menopausal women . Iranian Journal of Pharmaceutical Research. 2013;12(1):217-222. 

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury . National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; 2012-. [Updated April 5, 2020]. Valerian. Accessed at ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK548255 on January 29, 2025. 

Pattanittum P, Kunyanone N, Brown J, et al. Dietary supplements for dysmenorrhoea . Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2016;(3):CD002124. Accessed at cochranelibrary.com on January 14, 2025. 

Sateia MJ, Buysse DJ, Krystal AD, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the pharmacological treatment of chronic insomnia in adults: an American Academy of Sleep Medicine Clinical Practice Guideline . Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine . 2017;13(2):307-349.  

Valente V, Machado D, Jorge S, et al. Does valerian work for insomnia? An umbrella review of the evidence . European Neuropsychopharmacology . 2024;82:6-28. 

Valerian. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on January 3, 2025. [Database subscription]. 

This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged.
NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH.

Last Updated:  May 2025

Share Email Facebook X

© Steven Foster

Related Topics
Herbs at a Glance
HerbList App

Related Fact Sheets
Sleep Disorders and Complementary Health Approaches